README.md, before:

# 🎯 Employee Attrition Predictor

<div align="center">

**Complete Machine Learning Pipeline + Web Application**

*Comprehensive ML Project: EDA → Model Comparison → Hyperparameter Tuning → Production Deployment*

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8+-3776AB)](https://python.org)
[![scikit-learn](https://img.shields.io/badge/scikit--learn-F7931E)](https://scikit-learn.org/)
[![pandas](https://img.shields.io/badge/pandas-2C2D72)](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
[![matplotlib](https://img.shields.io/badge/matplotlib-3776AB)](https://matplotlib.org/)
[![XGBoost](https://img.shields.io/badge/XGBoost-FF6B35)](https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-009688)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-16-black)](https://nextjs.org/)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-blue)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)

**🏆 Winner: Random Forest (85.85% Accuracy)**

</div>

## 🧠 Machine Learning Pipeline Overview

This project demonstrates a complete end-to-end machine learning workflow, from exploratory data analysis to production deployment. The focus is on comprehensive model evaluation and optimization rather than just building a single model.

### 📊 Key ML Achievements
- **4 Algorithms Compared**: Random Forest, XGBoost, SVM, KNN
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: GridSearchCV with 5-fold cross-validation
- **85.85% Best Accuracy**: Random Forest outperforms other algorithms
- **Production Deployment**: Model serialized and served via REST API
- **Web Integration**: Interactive dashboard for real-time predictions

## 📈 Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

The project begins with comprehensive data analysis in `EAD-checkpoint.ipynb`:

### 🔍 Dataset Overview
- **Source**: IBM HR Analytics Employee Attrition Dataset
- **Size**: 1,470 employee records, 35 features
- **Target**: Binary classification (Attrition: Yes/No)
- **Class Distribution**: ~16% attrition rate

### 📊 Data Analysis Performed
- **Statistical Summary**: Mean, median, standard deviation, correlations
- **Missing Values**: Analysis and imputation strategies
- **Feature Distributions**: Histograms, box plots, scatter plots
- **Correlation Analysis**: Feature relationships with target variable
- **Outlier Detection**: Statistical methods and visual inspection

### 🎯 Feature Engineering
- **Categorical Encoding**: One-hot encoding for nominal variables
- **Numerical Scaling**: Standardization where appropriate
- **Feature Selection**: Correlation-based and importance-based methods
- **Derived Features**: Business-relevant feature combinations

## 🤖 Model Development & Comparison

### 🏆 Algorithms Evaluated

| Algorithm | Best Accuracy | Key Parameters |
|-----------|---------------|----------------|
| **🏆 Random Forest** | **85.85%** | `criterion='entropy'`, `max_depth=None` |
| XGBoost | 85.37% | `learning_rate=0.1`, `max_depth=7` |
| SVM | 85.24% | `C=20`, `kernel='linear'` |
| KNN | 83.54% | `n_neighbors=11`, `metric='euclidean'` |

### ⚙️ Hyperparameter Tuning Strategy

#### Random Forest Grid Search
```python
'max_depth': [1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, None],
'criterion': ['gini', 'entropy']
```

#### XGBoost Grid Search
```python
'n_estimators': [5, 10, 15, 20],
'learning_rate': [0.01, 0.05, 0.1],
'max_depth': [3, 5, 7]
```

#### SVM Grid Search
```python
'C': [1, 5, 7, 10, 20],
'kernel': ['rbf', 'linear']
```

#### KNN Grid Search
```python
'n_neighbors': [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11],
'metric': ['euclidean', 'manhattan']
```

### 🔬 Cross-Validation Methodology
- **StratifiedKFold**: 5-fold cross-validation maintaining class distribution
- **Evaluation Metric**: Accuracy (balanced dataset consideration)
- **Parallel Processing**: `n_jobs=-1` for computational efficiency
- **Reproducibility**: `random_state=42` for consistent results

## 🏆 Model Selection & Deployment

### 🎯 Winner: Random Forest Classifier

**Why Random Forest Won:**
- **Highest Accuracy**: 85.85% vs competitors
- **Robust Performance**: Handles outliers and missing data well
- **Feature Importance**: Provides interpretable feature rankings
- **Ensemble Method**: Reduces overfitting through bagging
- **Production Ready**: Efficient inference and scalable

**Best Parameters:**
```python
RandomForestClassifier(
    criterion='entropy',
    max_depth=None,
    random_state=42
)
```

### 🚀 Production Pipeline

#### Preprocessing Pipeline
```python
preprocess = ColumnTransformer([
    ("num", SimpleImputer(strategy="median"), num_cols),
    ("cat", Pipeline([
        SimpleImputer(strategy="most_frequent"),
        OneHotEncoder(handle_unknown="ignore")
    ]), cat_cols)
])
```

#### Model Serialization
- **Format**: joblib pickle for scikit-learn compatibility
- **File**: `attrition_model.pkl` (production model)
- **Schema**: `feature_cols.pkl` (feature preprocessing)
- **Size**: Optimized for fast loading and inference

## 🎨 Web Application Interface

### 🎯 User Experience Design
- **Modern UI**: Clean, professional interface with yellow accent theme
- **Responsive Design**: Mobile-first approach, works on all devices
- **Interactive Forms**: Real-time validation and user feedback
- **Visual Results**: Progress bars, risk indicators, and animated transitions

### ⚡ Technical Implementation
- **Frontend**: Next.js 16 with React 19 and TypeScript
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS with custom design system
- **Animations**: Framer Motion for smooth micro-interactions
- **API Integration**: RESTful communication with FastAPI backend

### 🔄 Real-time Prediction Flow
1. **User Input**: Employee data collection via intuitive forms
2. **Data Validation**: Client-side validation with TypeScript types
3. **API Request**: Secure POST request to ML prediction endpoint
4. **Model Inference**: Fast prediction with preprocessed features
5. **Result Display**: Visual feedback with probability scores and risk levels

## 🛠 Technical Architecture

### 🐍 Backend (ML API)
```python
# Core technologies
- FastAPI: High-performance async web framework
- scikit-learn: Machine learning algorithms and preprocessing
- pandas: Data manipulation and feature engineering
- joblib: Model serialization and loading
```

### ⚛️ Frontend (User Interface)
```javascript
// Core technologies
- Next.js: React framework with App Router
- TypeScript: Type-safe JavaScript development
- Tailwind CSS: Utility-first CSS framework
- Framer Motion: Animation and gesture library
```
<img width="577" height="363" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ed847b37-0ebe-4b62-b8a7-dc549dae0c61" />



### 📁 Project Structure
```
attrition-predictor/
├── 📊 Attrition.csv                    # Raw dataset (1.4MB)
├── 🤖 EAD-checkpoint.ipynb             # Complete ML analysis (EDA + Modeling)
├── attrition-frontend/                 # Next.js web application
│   ├── app/                           # App Router pages and layouts
│   ├── components/                    # Reusable UI components
│   └── package.json                   # Frontend dependencies
└── backend/                           # FastAPI ML service
    ├── app.py                         # API endpoints and ML logic
    ├── attrition_model.pkl            # Serialized Random Forest model
    ├── feature_cols.pkl               # Feature preprocessing schema
    └── EAD-checkpoint.ipynb           # Model development notebook
```

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+ with pip
- Node.js 18+ with npm

### Installation & Setup

1. **Clone Repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <your-repo-url>
   cd attrition-predictor
   ```

2. **Backend Setup**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   pip install fastapi uvicorn scikit-learn pandas numpy joblib
   uvicorn app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
   ```

3. **Frontend Setup** (New Terminal)
   ```bash
   cd attrition-frontend
   npm install
   npm run dev
   ```

4. **Access Application**
   - Frontend: http://localhost:3000
   - API Docs: http://localhost:8000/docs

## 🔬 ML Model Details

### 📋 Input Features
- **Age**: Employee age (numerical)
- **MonthlyIncome**: Monthly salary (numerical)
- **OverTime**: Overtime status (categorical: Yes/No)
- **Department**: Department name (categorical)
- **BusinessTravel**: Travel frequency (categorical)

### 🎯 Prediction Output
```json
{
  "prediction": "No",
  "probability": 0.23,
  "sentence": "The model predicts this employee will likely stay (Attrition: No) with an estimated attrition probability of 23.0%."
}
```

### 📊 Risk Categories
- **🟢 Low Risk**: < 40% attrition probability
- **🟡 Medium Risk**: 40-70% attrition probability
- **🔴 High Risk**: > 70% attrition probability

## 📈 Model Performance Analysis

### 🎯 Confusion Matrix (Estimated)
```
Predicted:     No     Yes
Actual: No   1200    50
        Yes   150    70

Accuracy: 85.85%
Precision: 82.4%
Recall: 78.9%
F1-Score: 80.6%
```

### 🔍 Feature Importance (Random Forest)
1. **MonthlyIncome**: 28% - Primary salary factor
2. **Age**: 22% - Experience correlation
3. **OverTime**: 18% - Work-life balance indicator
4. **Department**: 15% - Role-specific patterns
5. **BusinessTravel**: 12% - Travel impact on retention

## 🤝 Usage Examples

### API Prediction Request
```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/predict" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "data": {
         "Age": 35,
         "MonthlyIncome": 6500,
         "OverTime": "No",
         "Department": "Research & Development",
         "BusinessTravel": "Travel_Rarely"
       }
     }'
```

### Web Interface Usage
1. Fill employee details in the form
2. Click "Run Prediction Engine"
3. View animated results with probability visualization
4. Risk assessment with actionable insights

## 🎓 Learning Outcomes

This project demonstrates proficiency in:

### 📊 Data Science Skills
- Exploratory data analysis and visualization
- Statistical analysis and hypothesis testing
- Feature engineering and selection
- Model evaluation and validation

### 🤖 Machine Learning Engineering
- Algorithm selection and comparison
- Hyperparameter optimization techniques
- Cross-validation methodologies
- Model serialization and deployment

### 🚀 Full-Stack Development
- REST API design and implementation
- Modern React application development
- Type-safe programming with TypeScript
- Responsive web design principles

### 🔧 DevOps & Production
- Model serving and inference optimization
- API documentation and testing
- Container-ready application structure
- Performance monitoring and optimization

## 📚 Key Files & Notebooks

- **`EAD-checkpoint.ipynb`**: Complete ML workflow from data loading to model deployment
- **`attrition_model.pkl`**: Production-ready Random Forest model
- **`feature_cols.pkl`**: Preprocessing schema for consistent feature handling
- **`app.py`**: FastAPI application with ML prediction endpoints
- **`page.tsx`**: React interface with form handling and result visualization

## 🏆 Project Highlights

✅ **Comprehensive ML Pipeline**: From raw data to production model
✅ **Rigorous Model Evaluation**: 4 algorithms with statistical validation
✅ **Production Deployment**: REST API with real-time inference
✅ **Modern Web Interface**: Professional UI with smooth animations
✅ **Reproducible Research**: Jupyter notebooks with complete documentation
✅ **Industry Best Practices**: Cross-validation, feature engineering, model selection

## Attribution

**Dataset**: IBM HR Analytics Employee Attrition Dataset (Kaggle)
**Libraries**: scikit-learn, pandas, FastAPI, Next.js, Framer Motion

Commit message:

Revise project overview in README
Updated project description to specify focus on employee attrition prediction and web interface.

README.md, after:

# 🎯 Employee Attrition Predictor

<div align="center">

**Complete Machine Learning Pipeline + Web Application**

*Comprehensive ML Project: EDA → Model Comparison → Hyperparameter Tuning → Production Deployment*

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8+-3776AB)](https://python.org)
[![scikit-learn](https://img.shields.io/badge/scikit--learn-F7931E)](https://scikit-learn.org/)
[![pandas](https://img.shields.io/badge/pandas-2C2D72)](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
[![matplotlib](https://img.shields.io/badge/matplotlib-3776AB)](https://matplotlib.org/)
[![XGBoost](https://img.shields.io/badge/XGBoost-FF6B35)](https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-009688)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-16-black)](https://nextjs.org/)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-blue)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)

**🏆 Winner: Random Forest (85.85% Accuracy)**

</div>

## 🧠 Machine Learning Pipeline Overview

This project predicts employee attrition using machine learning and presents the results through a simple web interface. Different models were tested and compared, and the final model is exposed via a FastAPI API and a Next.js frontend.

### 📊 Key ML Achievements
- **4 Algorithms Compared**: Random Forest, XGBoost, SVM, KNN
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: GridSearchCV with 5-fold cross-validation
- **85.85% Best Accuracy**: Random Forest outperforms other algorithms
- **Production Deployment**: Model serialized and served via REST API
- **Web Integration**: Interactive dashboard for real-time predictions

## 📈 Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

The project begins with comprehensive data analysis in `EAD-checkpoint.ipynb`:

### 🔍 Dataset Overview
- **Source**: IBM HR Analytics Employee Attrition Dataset
- **Size**: 1,470 employee records, 35 features
- **Target**: Binary classification (Attrition: Yes/No)
- **Class Distribution**: ~16% attrition rate

### 📊 Data Analysis Performed
- **Statistical Summary**: Mean, median, standard deviation, correlations
- **Missing Values**: Analysis and imputation strategies
- **Feature Distributions**: Histograms, box plots, scatter plots
- **Correlation Analysis**: Feature relationships with target variable
- **Outlier Detection**: Statistical methods and visual inspection

### 🎯 Feature Engineering
- **Categorical Encoding**: One-hot encoding for nominal variables
- **Numerical Scaling**: Standardization where appropriate
- **Feature Selection**: Correlation-based and importance-based methods
- **Derived Features**: Business-relevant feature combinations

## 🤖 Model Development & Comparison

### 🏆 Algorithms Evaluated

| Algorithm | Best Accuracy | Key Parameters |
|-----------|---------------|----------------|
| **🏆 Random Forest** | **85.85%** | `criterion='entropy'`, `max_depth=None` |
| XGBoost | 85.37% | `learning_rate=0.1`, `max_depth=7` |
| SVM | 85.24% | `C=20`, `kernel='linear'` |
| KNN | 83.54% | `n_neighbors=11`, `metric='euclidean'` |

### ⚙️ Hyperparameter Tuning Strategy

#### Random Forest Grid Search
```python
'max_depth': [1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, None],
'criterion': ['gini', 'entropy']
```

#### XGBoost Grid Search
```python
'n_estimators': [5, 10, 15, 20],
'learning_rate': [0.01, 0.05, 0.1],
'max_depth': [3, 5, 7]
```

#### SVM Grid Search
```python
'C': [1, 5, 7, 10, 20],
'kernel': ['rbf', 'linear']
```

#### KNN Grid Search
```python
'n_neighbors': [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11],
'metric': ['euclidean', 'manhattan']
```

### 🔬 Cross-Validation Methodology
- **StratifiedKFold**: 5-fold cross-validation maintaining class distribution
- **Evaluation Metric**: Accuracy (balanced dataset consideration)
- **Parallel Processing**: `n_jobs=-1` for computational efficiency
- **Reproducibility**: `random_state=42` for consistent results

## 🏆 Model Selection & Deployment

### 🎯 Winner: Random Forest Classifier

**Why Random Forest Won:**
- **Highest Accuracy**: 85.85% vs competitors
- **Robust Performance**: Handles outliers and missing data well
- **Feature Importance**: Provides interpretable feature rankings
- **Ensemble Method**: Reduces overfitting through bagging
- **Production Ready**: Efficient inference and scalable

**Best Parameters:**
```python
RandomForestClassifier(
    criterion='entropy',
    max_depth=None,
    random_state=42
)
```

### 🚀 Production Pipeline

#### Preprocessing Pipeline
```python
preprocess = ColumnTransformer([
    ("num", SimpleImputer(strategy="median"), num_cols),
    ("cat", Pipeline([
        SimpleImputer(strategy="most_frequent"),
        OneHotEncoder(handle_unknown="ignore")
    ]), cat_cols)
])
```

#### Model Serialization
- **Format**: joblib pickle for scikit-learn compatibility
- **File**: `attrition_model.pkl` (production model)
- **Schema**: `feature_cols.pkl` (feature preprocessing)
- **Size**: Optimized for fast loading and inference

## 🎨 Web Application Interface

### 🎯 User Experience Design
- **Modern UI**: Clean, professional interface with yellow accent theme
- **Responsive Design**: Mobile-first approach, works on all devices
- **Interactive Forms**: Real-time validation and user feedback
- **Visual Results**: Progress bars, risk indicators, and animated transitions

### ⚡ Technical Implementation
- **Frontend**: Next.js 16 with React 19 and TypeScript
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS with custom design system
- **Animations**: Framer Motion for smooth micro-interactions
- **API Integration**: RESTful communication with FastAPI backend

### 🔄 Real-time Prediction Flow
1. **User Input**: Employee data collection via intuitive forms
2. **Data Validation**: Client-side validation with TypeScript types
3. **API Request**: Secure POST request to ML prediction endpoint
4. **Model Inference**: Fast prediction with preprocessed features
5. **Result Display**: Visual feedback with probability scores and risk levels

## 🛠 Technical Architecture

### 🐍 Backend (ML API)
```python
# Core technologies
- FastAPI: High-performance async web framework
- scikit-learn: Machine learning algorithms and preprocessing
- pandas: Data manipulation and feature engineering
- joblib: Model serialization and loading
```

### ⚛️ Frontend (User Interface)
```javascript
// Core technologies
- Next.js: React framework with App Router
- TypeScript: Type-safe JavaScript development
- Tailwind CSS: Utility-first CSS framework
- Framer Motion: Animation and gesture library
```
<img width="577" height="363" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ed847b37-0ebe-4b62-b8a7-dc549dae0c61" />



### 📁 Project Structure
```
attrition-predictor/
├── 📊 Attrition.csv                    # Raw dataset (1.4MB)
├── 🤖 EAD-checkpoint.ipynb             # Complete ML analysis (EDA + Modeling)
├── attrition-frontend/                 # Next.js web application
│   ├── app/                           # App Router pages and layouts
│   ├── components/                    # Reusable UI components
│   └── package.json                   # Frontend dependencies
└── backend/                           # FastAPI ML service
    ├── app.py                         # API endpoints and ML logic
    ├── attrition_model.pkl            # Serialized Random Forest model
    ├── feature_cols.pkl               # Feature preprocessing schema
    └── EAD-checkpoint.ipynb           # Model development notebook
```

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+ with pip
- Node.js 18+ with npm

### Installation & Setup

1. **Clone Repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <your-repo-url>
   cd attrition-predictor
   ```

2. **Backend Setup**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   pip install fastapi uvicorn scikit-learn pandas numpy joblib
   uvicorn app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
   ```

3. **Frontend Setup** (New Terminal)
   ```bash
   cd attrition-frontend
   npm install
   npm run dev
   ```

4. **Access Application**
   - Frontend: http://localhost:3000
   - API Docs: http://localhost:8000/docs

## 🔬 ML Model Details

### 📋 Input Features
- **Age**: Employee age (numerical)
- **MonthlyIncome**: Monthly salary (numerical)
- **OverTime**: Overtime status (categorical: Yes/No)
- **Department**: Department name (categorical)
- **BusinessTravel**: Travel frequency (categorical)

### 🎯 Prediction Output
```json
{
  "prediction": "No",
  "probability": 0.23,
  "sentence": "The model predicts this employee will likely stay (Attrition: No) with an estimated attrition probability of 23.0%."
}
```

### 📊 Risk Categories
- **🟢 Low Risk**: < 40% attrition probability
- **🟡 Medium Risk**: 40-70% attrition probability
- **🔴 High Risk**: > 70% attrition probability

## 📈 Model Performance Analysis

### 🎯 Confusion Matrix (Estimated)
```
Predicted:     No     Yes
Actual: No   1200    50
        Yes   150    70

Accuracy: 85.85%
Precision: 82.4%
Recall: 78.9%
F1-Score: 80.6%
```

### 🔍 Feature Importance (Random Forest)
1. **MonthlyIncome**: 28% - Primary salary factor
2. **Age**: 22% - Experience correlation
3. **OverTime**: 18% - Work-life balance indicator
4. **Department**: 15% - Role-specific patterns
5. **BusinessTravel**: 12% - Travel impact on retention

## 🤝 Usage Examples

### API Prediction Request
```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/predict" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "data": {
         "Age": 35,
         "MonthlyIncome": 6500,
         "OverTime": "No",
         "Department": "Research & Development",
         "BusinessTravel": "Travel_Rarely"
       }
     }'
```

### Web Interface Usage
1. Fill employee details in the form
2. Click "Run Prediction Engine"
3. View animated results with probability visualization
4. Risk assessment with actionable insights

## 🎓 Learning Outcomes

This project demonstrates proficiency in:

### 📊 Data Science Skills
- Exploratory data analysis and visualization
- Statistical analysis and hypothesis testing
- Feature engineering and selection
- Model evaluation and validation

### 🤖 Machine Learning Engineering
- Algorithm selection and comparison
- Hyperparameter optimization techniques
- Cross-validation methodologies
- Model serialization and deployment

### 🚀 Full-Stack Development
- REST API design and implementation
- Modern React application development
- Type-safe programming with TypeScript
- Responsive web design principles

### 🔧 DevOps & Production
- Model serving and inference optimization
- API documentation and testing
- Container-ready application structure
- Performance monitoring and optimization

## 📚 Key Files & Notebooks

- **`EAD-checkpoint.ipynb`**: Complete ML workflow from data loading to model deployment
- **`attrition_model.pkl`**: Production-ready Random Forest model
- **`feature_cols.pkl`**: Preprocessing schema for consistent feature handling
- **`app.py`**: FastAPI application with ML prediction endpoints
- **`page.tsx`**: React interface with form handling and result visualization

## 🏆 Project Highlights

✅ **Comprehensive ML Pipeline**: From raw data to production model
✅ **Rigorous Model Evaluation**: 4 algorithms with statistical validation
✅ **Production Deployment**: REST API with real-time inference
✅ **Modern Web Interface**: Professional UI with smooth animations
✅ **Reproducible Research**: Jupyter notebooks with complete documentation
✅ **Industry Best Practices**: Cross-validation, feature engineering, model selection

## Attribution

**Dataset**: IBM HR Analytics Employee Attrition Dataset (Kaggle)
**Libraries**: scikit-learn, pandas, FastAPI, Next.js, Framer Motion
